So, we have seen how to use a divide and conquer
strategy, to implement a sorting algorithm
called merge sort. So, now we want to analyze
whether the merge sort actually behaves, better
than our order n square intuitive sorts like
insertion sort and selection sort.
So, in order to analyze merge sort, we first
need to look at the merge operation itself.
So, remember that when we merge two sorted
lists, what we do is, we take both lists side
by side and we keep copying the smaller of
the two elements at the head of each list
into the final list C.
So, this was the code that we wrote last time.
So, basically we have a list A, which runs
from 0 to m minus 1 and we have another list
B, which runs from 0 to n minus 1 and we produce
the output in a third list C which has indices
from 0 to m plus n minus 1. So, what we do
is, we start by putting an index i, j into
these two lists and index k into the list
C and we compare these two values and we take
the smaller of the two values and move it.
And then we move this and then we keep moving
these two indices and all the while we keep
moving k. So, the question is how long does
this take?
So, in each iteration notice that we add one
element to C, but the size of C is exactly
m plus n, because there are m elements in
A and there are n elements in B and each of
them will eventually make it to C. So, there
are m plus n elements and in each iteration
of this loop, the loop that we had before,
in each iteration of this loop, one element
gets added to C, either in this if or in this
if, k is incremented.
So, this list as you can see will make, k
will make progress in every iteration. So,
there is a bound of m plus n steps for this
loop and in the loop, we will if you count
very carefully, we have a comparison, we may
have one more comparison, we have an assignment
and so on. But, you can check that there are
no more than seven steps involved, so some
constant number of steps regardless, so which
branch we take in this, so we have m plus
n iterations, each of which has some constant
number of steps.
So, we have over all order m plus n steps,
but m plus n is of course, bounded by 2 times
the maximum of m plus n. So, we can just say
that this thing takes order of maximum m plus
n. If m is roughly the same as n which will
typically be the case in merge sort, because
we split it in half, the two will differ by
at most 1 in terms of length. Then, we find
that merging is a linear time operation, so
we want to merge two lists, it takes time
proportional to the length of the two lists
together.
So, now coming to merge sort itself, what
we want to do is, we want to take a list of
size n and we want to split it into two lists
of size n by 2. And then, we sort these separately
and then we merge.
So, in order to do this, it is very clear
that if we look at t n as the time taken by
merge sort on an input of size n, then this
requires us to sort two lists of size n by
2 and then, as we have seen it takes order
n time in order to merge that. Now, in order
to compute this t of n explicitly, we will
assume that n is a power of 2. Now, it turns
out that merge sort does not in any way require
n to be a power of 2, not even an even number.
If it is not even, then when we split it into
two parts, they will not be equal, because
we cannot split an odd number into two equal
parts.
But, it does not a matter, the algorithm will
still work correctly, this assumption that
n is 2 to the k is only a signification for
us to be able to come up with a nice calculation.
So, we have two problems of size n by 2, 2
times of t of n by 2 and then we have a merge
of n. So, how do we solve something like this.
So, of course, we also have a base case which
says that when we have only one element, it
takes no time except to just check that you
have only one element, so t of 1 is 1.
So, if you have a solution I mean an expression
like this two recurrences like this, then
how do we solve them. So, the basic idea is
to keep the simplest way to do it. Of course,
you can come up with more sophisticated way
which we will not go into right now. But,
one simple way is you just keep expanding
using the same analysis, the same expression,
until you come down to the base case.
So, we start with the base case t 1 equal
to 1 and the general case t n is 2 times t
of n by 2 plus n. So, now what we can do is,
we can use the same equation to expand t of
n by 2. So, we expand t of n by 2, then we
find that t of n by 2 becomes 2 times t of
n by 4 plus n by 2, because I take whatever
is here divide 2, n by 2 by 2 is n by 4 and
I take whatever is here and plug it in here,
so n by 2 comes.
Now, if I expand this out carefully, then
this 2 and this 2, rather than write it as
4 and I will write it as 2 squared, I will
also observe and this will be useful that
this 4 is again 2 squared and then this n
by 2 is multiplied, so this n by 2 is multiplied
by 2. So, I get 2 times n by 2, so that is
n plus n, so I get 2 n.
So, it is not an accident that I have 2 squared,
2 squared and 2 n as we will see, if you do
one more step, now if I take this expression
t of n by 2 square and I apply the same rule
to this, then this t of n by 2 squared expands
out like this. It is n by 2 square divide
by 2 is n by 2 cube, so I get 2 times t n
by 2 cube plus n by 2 square. Now, this and
this will cancel, so I get 1 n here, I already
have 2 n, so I get 3 n and this 2 into 2 square,
I will write as 2 cube, so I am going from
2 square t n by 2 square plus 2 n to cube
t n by 2 cube plus 3 n. So, it is easy to
verify that if you do this j times we will
have 2 to the power j times t of n by 2 to
the power j plus j n.
So, now when do we reach the base case, we
reach the base case when n by 2 to the power
j goes to 1. So, when does this happen? Well,
n by 2 to the power j is equal to the 1, it
means that 2 to the power j is equal to n,
so j is nothing but, log of n to the base
2. So, we will always use log n in general
to mean log of n to the base 2, unless otherwise
specified.
So, after log of n steps, we end up with something
which looks like this, it has 2 to the j t
n by 2 to the j, after log n steps, j is log
n, so I have 2 to the log n, then t of n by
this, so this is t of 1 now, so this is just
1, so this multiplied by 1. And then, I have
j times n, so j is log n, so j is log n and
n is n. So, I have after doing this expansion
log n times I end up with 2 to the log n plus
log n times n, 2 to the log n by definition
is just n, that is the definition of log that
is the exponent of 2 which gives you n.
So, this is n and I have this gives n log
n and we know from general things that n is
big O of n log n. So, this is bounded by 2
times n log n. So, we can say that over all
merge sort takes time O n log n. So, we have
achieved a significant improvement, because
remember that, so far both insertion sort
and selection sort were O n square and we
have come down from O n square to O n log
n by using this divide and conquer strategy.
So, why is this a big deal, we saw in the
beginning that O n log n is much more efficient
than O n square. If we assume as we have said
that a reasonably standard desktop machine
can do 10 to the 8 operations per second,
then the size of the feasible input of what
we can sort with a sorting algorithm, goes
from 10,000 for an n square algorithm to 10
million or 1 crore for an n log n algorithm.
So, therefore if you really have to sort large
volumes of data, n log n makes it feasible
for us do so in a reasonable amount to time,
whereas n square would take years as we saw
before.
So, before we conclude there are some nice
things to notice. So, this merge operation
which we have used in merge sort, is actually
a very useful operation on any sorted list.
So, one thing that we do in merge is that
we actually combine the list without losing
anything. So, if we merge two lists such,
let us say 1, 2, 4 and 2, 3, 6 then in our
final thing, we will have 2 copies of 2, because
there are 2 copies and then 3, 4, 6.
So, sometimes we may want to not have this,
we may want to keep only one copy, we may
want to treat this as sets, so if I take this
as a set 1, 2, 4 and a set 2, 3, 6, then the
resulting union of the two set is 1, 2, 3,
4, 6 you have only one copy of 2. Then, we
can easily do this in our merge procedure
by just saying that when I find, so earlier
we had two cases, we had A i less than or
equal to B j and then we had A i greater than
B j.
So, in the first case, we copied from A i,
the second case we copied from B j and in
either case we only incremented either i or
j along with k. In this case, we say that
if the two sides are equal, we keep one copy
of it in the final list, but we skip over
both these copies, we increment all three
pointers. So, if we are at this position and
this position, then in our output we will
copy a 2 and then we will move this pointer
to the right and this pointer to the right,
so I do not copy 2 twice, so this is one thing
that we can do.
The other thing that we can do is to intersect
two lists, so if we again have 1, 2, 3 may
be 2, 3, 6 then may be we want to make sure
that we have in our output only 2 and 3. So,
now what we do is, when we start looking at
these two, if they are not equal, then obviously
they are not in the intersection. But, which
one should we leave, well 2 could still be
there, because 1 is smaller, so we move this
pointer right.
So, if A i smaller than B j we increment i,
now if say when A i, B j are the same, we
would as we did for union, we will move the
2 out and we will merge, we will remove both
pointers, so now both pointers come to this
position. Now, again we will say that we have
3 and we will continue and then when we see
the other way around, if B j is smaller than
A i, we will increment j and not i.
So, the important thing to note is that merge
is a very generic operation, we can do what
we did earlier which is to actually shuffle
the two sorted lists into one big sorted list,
where no elements are lost or we can remove
duplicates, while we are doing is, treated
as a set union operation or we can only keep
the common parts which is set intersection
operation.
So, to check that you have understood this,
maybe you should try out the following exercise.
So, supposing we want to do what is called
list difference, so set difference is sometime
written like this. So, if I take the set 1,
2, 3 and the set say 3, 4, 6 and I ask the
set difference, it says whatever is in A,
but not in B, so the answer should be in this
case 1 and then 2, but not 3, because 3 is
there in both.
So, we can do the same thing for list. So,
for example, if I have list 1, 2, 3 and list
3, 4, 6 then I may want to keep in the list
only 1, 2. So, just check whether you can
adapt merge in the way we have done now for
union and intersection in order to do list
difference.
So, merge sort though it is an order n log
n sorting algorithm and therefore it is significantly
faster than insertion sort or selection sort,
it does have some short comings. The main
problem with merge sort is that it requires
extra space. See, when I take A and B and
I merge it into C, it is almost impossible
to do this without storing the merged array
in a separate place. Because, if I start merging
in place, then the sorted order of A and B
gets messed up or I have to keep shifting
things and so the merge is no larger in linear
time.
So, if I want a linear time merge of A and
B, this can only be achieved by using an external
list of the size which is the sum of two lists
in order to store it. This means that if you
are sorting large arrays and also extra space
is being used, because I keep duplicating
the space in order to do the merge operation.
And of course, the other thing about merge
sort which is very difficult to overcome is
that it is inherently recursive and I mean
there is no way to actually easily make it
iterative, because we need to construct the
sorted things and then merge them.
So, we need to store these recursive solutions
at each point in order to combine. So, the
recursive call and return can be expensive
also. So, although merge sort is a very attractive
sort in terms of its theoretical complexity,
it is not sometimes used in practice, because
of these limitations and we will see how to
overcome this in some other way.
So, the main reason we need extra space in
merge sort, is because of the merge operation
as we saw in order to combine A and B into
a list C in linear time you need extra space.
Now, suppose and the reason this happens is
because we could have something like the left
side could be say 2, 4, 6 and the right side
could be say 1, 3, 5 and now we need to take
things from both sides. So, sometimes I need
think something from here, then I need take
something from here, then I need take something
from here and so on.
So, though each of the two half is sorted,
there are elements in left which must go to
right and there are elements from right which
must go to the left. So, now, if we could
come up with a way to avoid doing this, so
such that everything in the red part is smaller
than everything in the green part, then once
I have sorted the red part and I have sorted
then green part then automatically everything
in the red part stays to the left of everything
in the green part.
So, if I had had instead of this, if I had
had on the left I had started with say 2,
1, 3 and in the right I had started with 6,
4, 5 and then, I had locally sorted these
things. So, I got 1, 2, 3 and then here I
got 4, 5, 6 then after this if I guaranteed
the this the split was such that everything
on the left is smaller than everything on
the right, after doing this divide and then
solving the sub problems there is no combination
there is no need to merge. So, our next sorting
algorithm will look at a strategy to implement
this idea.